.TH 3DLIB 1 "2026-07-20" "3dlib" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
3dlib \- personal 3D model library manager for /share/3d
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B 3dlib
.I command
[options] [args...]
.P
.B 3dlib
.IR path | URL | bambustudio://...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B 3dlib
maintains a catalog of 3D models under
.B /share/3d
using SQLite metadata, thumbnails, and optional import/rename of
.BR .3mf ,
.BR .stl ,
.BR .step ,
.BR .FCStd ,
and related files.
.P
Project directories (unpacked Printables/Thingiverse/etc.\ downloads) live under
.BR projects/ .
Loose models are sorted into
.BR stl/ ,
.BR 3mf/ ,
.BR step/ ,
and
.BR fcstd/ .
.P
The web UI provides a gallery, item detail, STL inspection, and launching
Bambu Studio.  The same
.B run
command is intended as the
.B bambustudio://
scheme handler so MakerWorld \(lqOpen in Bambu Studio\(rq can import into the
library first.
.P
Source tree:
.BR /usr/local/3dlib
(bin and man page are installed as symlinks into
.B /usr/local/bin
and
.BR /usr/local/share/man ).
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Create library directories, config, and empty database.  Safe to re-run.
.TP
.BI import " PATH"
Import a model file, project directory, or zip into
.BR /share/3d .
Default is to
.B move
the source.  Prints a detailed per-item summary (name, source URL, size,
thumb, description snippet) unless
.B \-\-quiet
is given.  Directory imports only take 3D-related content; a single non-3D
file is an error.
.IP
.B Zip handling:
member list is inspected (like
.BR unzip\ \-l ).
If any model extension is present (stl, step, 3mf, \.\.\.), the archive is
unpacked under
.BR projects/ ,
a single top-level folder is flattened, and the project is cataloged.
Optional
.B \-\-source\-url
sets the primary page URL (MakerWorld CDN forms are canonicalized to
.BR https://makerworld.com/en/models/ID )
and writes a
.B URL
file when missing.
Zips with no model files are moved intact to
.B download_dir
(default
.BR /share/tmp ;
config key
.B download_dir
or env
.BR THREEDLIB_DOWNLOAD_DIR ).
.IP
Duplicates (content hash or MakerWorld DesignModelId) re-use the existing
catalog entry.
.TP
.BI delete " ID|PATH..."
.TQ
.BI rm " ID|PATH..."
Remove catalog entries.  By default also deletes the model files under
.B /share/3d
and the thumbnail.  Refuses to delete paths outside the library root unless
.B \-\-keep\-files
is given (catalog-only removal).
.TP
.BI edit " ID|PATH"
Update catalog metadata for one item (name, description, source URL(s),
status, site ids, tags).  Does not rename or move files.  Only options you pass
are changed.  Useful flags:
.BR \-\-url ,
.BR \-\-add\-url ,
.BR \-\-description ,
.BR \-\-name ,
.BR \-\-status ,
.BR \-\-tag ,
.BR \-\-tags ,
.BR \-\-dryrun .
Description may be
.B @file
or
.B \-
(stdin).
.TP
.BI tag " [ID|PATH] [TAG]..."
.TQ
.BI tags
Manage catalog keywords/tags (not present in Bambu 3MF metadata — you add
them).  With no ID, lists all tags and counts.  With an ID, add/remove/set
tags.  Filter with
.B 3dlib ls \-\-tag clasp
(repeatable; AND).  Also searchable via
.BR query .
.TP
.B scan
Catalog files already present under
.B /share/3d
that are not yet in the database.  Also runs encoding repair.
.TP
.BI query " TEXT"
.TQ
.BI search " TEXT"
Full-text search over names, descriptions, paths, and source URLs.
.TP
.B ls
List catalog items (newest first).  Filters:
.BR \-\-type ,
.BR \-\-kind ,
.BR \-\-status ,
.BR \-\-no\-thumb ,
.BR \-\-no\-source ,
.BR \-\-limit .
.TP
.BI describe " ID|PATH"
Show catalog details.  With
.B \-\-view ,
also open the thumbnail (see
.BR show ).
.TP
.BI show " ID|PATH"
.TQ
.BI inspect " ID|PATH"
.TQ
.BI view " ID|PATH"
Print item details and open the thumbnail in an image viewer
(default
.BR feh ).
Override with
.B THREEDLIB_IMAGE_VIEWER
or config
.BR image_viewer .
Generates a thumb if missing when possible.
.TP
.BI thumbs " [ID|PATH]..."
Generate thumbnails.  Order: project images, embedded 3MF previews, then
.B mesh-preview
for STL/STEP/OBJ/etc.
With no arguments, rebuilds items whose thumb is
.B missing
or
.B older than the source
file (mtime).  Pass ids/paths to target specific items.
.B \-\-force
rebuilds regardless of mtimes
.RB ( 3dlib\ thumbs\ 3\ \-\-force ;
.B \-\-force
alone rebuilds all).
.TP
.B stats
Print counts by kind/type and missing thumb/source tallies.
.TP
.BI run " TARGET"
.TQ
.BI open " TARGET"
Resolve
.I TARGET
(local path, catalog ID, MakerWorld HTTPS URL, or
.B bambustudio://
deep link), optionally import into the library, then open Bambu Studio.
.TP
.B serve
Start the local web UI (default port
.BR 31353 ).
.B Ctrl-C
stops;
.B SIGHUP
or
.B SIGQUIT
.RB ( Ctrl-\\ )
re-execs the process and reloads code (same PID; safe for OpenRC/systemd
.BR reload ).
Optional password protection for LAN family use (do
.B not
port-forward to the internet):
.B THREEDLIB_WEB_PASSWORD
(or
.B web.password
in config) gates browse/download;
.B THREEDLIB_WEB_ADMIN_PASSWORD
(or
.BR web.admin_password )
is a separate password that can delete items.
With only the family password set, that login has full access.
With both set, family login can download but not delete.
Connections from the same machine (loopback or this host's own
addresses) are treated as
.B admin
by default with no login
.RB ( local " admin" );
disable with
.B THREEDLIB_WEB_LOCAL_ADMIN=0
or
.BR web.local_admin=false .
Gallery supports multi-select download (zip) and bulk delete (admin).
Item pages have a Download button.
Admins also get a
.B Settings
page to edit
.I config.json
(library paths, web passwords, translation),
and an
.B Edit
page per item for name, description, source URLs, and related metadata.
.TP
.B install-handler
Install desktop entries and set
.B 3dlib
as the default handler for
.BR x-scheme-handler/bambustudio ,
.BR x-scheme-handler/freecad ,
and
.BR x-scheme-handler/3dlib .
Web UI open buttons use
.B bambustudio://library/ID
and
.BR freecad://library/ID
so the desktop session (with the correct
.BR DISPLAY /xpra)
starts
.B 3dlib run ,
which then launches the app.
.TP
.B repair-encoding
Fix UTF-8 mojibake in catalog text fields
.RB ( name ,
.BR name_orig ,
etc.).  Safe to re-run; also runs during
.BR scan .
.TP
.BI translate " [ID|PATH]..."
Translate non-English catalog names and descriptions (Chinese, German,
French, etc.) to English via an OpenAI-compatible API (ChatGPT or xAI Grok).
Uses
.B OPENAI_API_KEY
/
.B XAI_API_KEY .
Originals are stored in
.B name_orig
and
.BR description_orig .
On-disk basenames under the library are renamed to English by default
.RB ( \-\-rename\-files ;
use
.B \-\-no\-rename\-files
to skip).  Import also stores English filenames when auto-translate is on.
Detection defaults to all non-English
.RB ( translate.detect=auto );
set
.B cjk
for Chinese-only.  Also runs automatically on import when enabled (default).
.TP
.B help
Global help.  Use
.B 3dlib help
.I command
or
.B 3dlib
.I command
.B \-\-help
for subcommand help.
.SH OPTIONS
Common options (see each subcommand's
.BR \-\-help ):
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help for the command and exit without doing work.
.TP
.B \-\-dryrun, \-\-dry\-run
Describe actions only; do not modify files or launch Studio.
.TP
.B \-\-move
Move sources into the library (import default).
.TP
.B \-\-copy
Copy sources; leave originals in place.
.TP
.B \-\-clean
After a successful import, remove the source (with
.BR \-\-copy )
or empty leftovers (with directory
.BR \-\-move ).
.TP
.BI \-\-source\-url " URL"
With
.BR import ,
set the primary source page URL (canonicalized for MakerWorld/CDN forms).
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-files
With
.BR delete ,
remove only the catalog entry and thumbnail; leave model files on disk.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-import
With
.BR run ,
open Studio without importing into the library.
.P
Unknown options are rejected and the command does nothing (exit status 2).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /share/3d
Library root (models, projects, database, thumbs).
.TP
.I /share/tmp
Default
.B download_dir
for non-3D zips.
.TP
.I /share/3d/.library/library.db
SQLite catalog.
.TP
.I /share/3d/.library/config.json
Optional configuration (bind address, port, studio path,
.BR download_dir ).
.TP
.I /share/3d/.library/renames.jsonl
Rename audit log.
.TP
.I /share/3d/.thumbs/
Cached thumbnails.
.TP
.I /share/3d/projects/
Unpacked multi-file projects.
.TP
.I /share/3d/{stl,3mf,step,fcstd,inbox}/
Orphan / staging model buckets.
.TP
.I /usr/local/3dlib
Git project source (Perl modules, bin, man).
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/3dlib
Symlink to
.IR /usr/local/3dlib/bin/3dlib .
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/3dlib.1
Symlink to
.IR /usr/local/3dlib/man/3dlib.1 .
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/applications/3dlib-bambu.desktop
Desktop entry for
.B bambustudio://
(after
.BR install-handler ).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B THREEDLIB_ROOT
Override library root (default
.BR /share/3d ).
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
# Preview importing one file without changing anything
3dlib import /share/bambu/some-model.3mf --dryrun --copy

# Copy a project into the library
3dlib import /share/bambu/wallet --copy

# Search and inspect (thumbnail via feh / image_viewer)
3dlib query wallet
3dlib describe 42
3dlib show 42

# Delete catalog entry and library files
3dlib delete 42 --dryrun
3dlib delete 42

# Catalog only (leave files)
3dlib delete 42 --keep-files

# Web gallery (LAN only — do not expose to the internet)
export THREEDLIB_WEB_PASSWORD='family-secret'
export THREEDLIB_WEB_ADMIN_PASSWORD='admin-secret'   # optional; enables delete
3dlib serve
# then open http://localhost:31353/

# Open MakerWorld / Studio deep link via the library
3dlib run 'https://makerworld.com/en/models/USxxxxxxxx'
3dlib run 'bambustudio://...'
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success (including successful
.BR \-\-help ).
.TP
.B 2
Unknown command, invalid option, or usage error (no file changes).
.TP
.B other
Runtime failure (import error, missing file, etc.).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mesh-preview (1),
.BR bambu-studio (1)
(local wrapper),
.BR unzip (1).
.P
Web UI: after
.BR "3dlib serve" ,
visit
.IR http://localhost:31353/ .
.P
Project:
.IR /usr/local/3dlib .
.SH AUTHOR
Written for local use with the /share/3d library layout.
.SH BUGS
MakerWorld downloads may require authentication; automatic HTTP fetch is
best-effort.  Chinese filename translation uses a small built-in map plus
hex stubs for unknown characters.
